This video is brought to you by curiosity stream,
a subscription streaming service that offers over 2000 documentaries and
nonfiction titles, unlimited access starting at just $2 99 a month.
And for 30 days, it's free. If you sign up at curiosity,
stream.com/biographics and use the code, biographics more on them of it.
The name of Alfred Russell Wallace probably doesn't mean much to you,
but it really should. If you've heard of Charles Darwin,
then you should also know Alfred Wallace,
because really the two sort of did the same thing.
That was a point when Darwin's famous theory of evolution was referred to as the
Darwin Wallace theory of evolution. However,
the latter contribution slowly but surely began to fade away from the public
consciousness in a fitting example of publish or per Alfred
Rossel Wallace was one of the most notable scientists of the 19th century.
And he was more than just a naturalist.
He studied geography, Andro, ecology, and even astrobiology.
And to stop it all off, he was an auto died act. He was,
self-taught more out of necessity than desire because he didn't come from money
and couldn't afford a good education today.
Alfred Russell receives some of the recognition.
He richly deserves as we take a look at the life and the career of one
of the luminaries of natural history.
Alfred Russell Wallace was born on January the eighth,
1823 at Kensington cottage near the town of us Monmouthshire,
which is in Wales today.
But back then was located in more of a gray area that some considered part of
Wales and others considered a part of England.
This might sound inconsequential to us,
but some people have argued that this would make Wallace. We,
while others believe that he was English, including Wallace himself,
who always referred to himself as an Englishman,
he was the eighth of nine children, Thomas veer, Wallace and Mary,
and Grennell.
His mother was English while his father was Scottish and claimed to be a
descendant of the famed William Wallace.
Although this was never attested conclusively. Speaking of him,
we do have a video all about William Wallace. If you want to check that out,
I'll put a link below birds backed Alfred. When he was young,
his family moved around due to money troubles that would plague Wallace for most
of his life before he was born. His parents lived in London,
but relocated to Monmouth share to lower their cost of living.
Thomas Wallace had a law degree, but for some reason never went into practice.
Instead he relied on an inheritance for the first half of his adult life.
And when that ran out,
he attempted various business ventures that usually proved unsuccessful and left
his family worse off than it was at the start. When Wallace was five,
his parents, once again,
set off for greener and cheaper pastures and relocated to Harford young Alfred
enrolled at Richard ha's grammar school,
where he received the only formal education of his life.
Wallace never went to college because he never had the money,
but this did not stop him from becoming a first class naturalist and Explorer.
When Alfred was a teenager in 1837,
his family's financial situation went from bad to worse.
After his father basically lost everything in a swindle,
they could not afford to keep Alfred in school mob.
So instead they sent him to London to live with his older brother,
John who had found an apprenticeship as a carpenter.
Alfred only stayed there for a few months though,
before leaving the capital and moving in with another of his brothers, William,
who could take him on as an apprentice, Lance,
the two Wallace brothers worked as surveyors for six years until business slowed
down so much that a Alfred once again had to find new employment in 1844,
he managed to poll's experience into a teaching position.
That's the collegiate school in Lester, where he taught surveying.
And mapmaking this proved to be a crucial moment for Wallace because he met a
man who would have an enormous influence on his life.
Henry Walter Bates at the time Bates,
somewhat of a celebrity in the entomology world. He was only 19 years old,
but already had a paper on Beatles published in the scientific journal.
The zoologist Bateson Wallace struck up a friendship together.
And the former sparks the latters interest in entomology Alfred's life took a
turn in 1845 when his brother William died,
suddenly he left his teaching in Lester and went to where William survey company
was located and assumed control of the business. During these years,
Wallace's interest in the natural world, increased greatly.
He corresponded frequently with Bates and had become an insect collector
himself.
It was at this time that he first expressed an interest in evolution and wrote a
letter to Bates from 1846, Evan,
that he grew dissatisfied with the local selection of bugs and that he would
like to take one family of insects and study it thoroughly with a view to the
theory of the origin of species.
His passion was aided by his new job being AOR meant that he would take long
walks through the British countryside where he could explore at his leisure.
What he didn't like though, was all the paperwork, the fee collection,
and all the other bureaucratic responsibilities that came with the job.
Wallace read up on the travels of naturalists who came before him such as
Alexander Von Humboldt, or either FIFA or more relevant to us today.
Charles Darwin,
who had published the voyage of the be a few years prior Wallace realized that
the only way for him to join their S was to travel to mysterious far away lands
and see for himself what sites the natural world had to offer.
His idea was met with great enthusiasm by Henry bat who became his traveling
companion.
The two concluded that they could fund their trip by selling specimens of
insects and other animals that they found to British museums and private
collectors. So in April, 1848,
the young duo set off from Liverpool to the Amazon rainforest.
The explorers landed in Belham a Brazilian port city that served as the gateway
to the Amazon river in late may off, they went into the rainforest.
Wallace Bates only explored together for a few months before deciding to go
there separate ways. The reason for this is still unclear. Well,
some historians pine, the two had a falling out.
Others say that it was simply so they could cover more ground.
It was just as well though,
since baits ended up spending over a decade in the Amazon collecting insects
while Wallace was there for less than half that time and diversified his
interests, Wallace collected plenty of specimen. Sure.
But he also studied the people. He encountered the languages and the cultures.
He put his surveying experience to good use and chartered the Rio Negro.
One of the Amazon's largest tributaries. More importantly though,
he began developing his theory of natural selection.
During this trip in particular,
Wallace came to realize that geographical barriers are often congruous with
species barriers,
which makes sense when animals adapt and develop traits to suit their
environments in 1852, Wallace was in poor health.
So he decided that it was time to England. However,
on the way there disaster struck one. After another,
once he reached civilization back in Brazil,
he found out that his younger brother Herbert had died.
The sibling had also come to explore the Amerson,
but did so mostly on his own in 1851, Herbert intended to head back to England,
but Courty yellow fever and passed away.
Then Alfred Wallace discovered that all the specimens he had sent back for the
last two years of his trip,
it never made it out of Brazil and were instead delayed at a dark in Manos.
Wallace had a secure passage for himself and the bulk of his collection,
but another tragedy occurred while he was in the middle of the Atlantic ocean.
The Chevy was on board, caught fire and sank.
There were no vitalities as the crew and passengers managed to for 10 days in
lifeboats until a cargo ship passed by and rescued them. However,
all of Wallace's specimens and all of his notes were lost to the bottom of the
ocean,
except for just a couple of notebooks that he managed to save back in London.
Wallace had a thing along and hard about his next step.
The bulk of the collection, the gathered in the Amazon may have been destroyed,
but fortunately the, it was partially insured.
So the naturalist had some breathing room financially, despite losing his notes.
Wallace knew enough that he wrote several academic papers,
which were well received and helped establish him among British naturalists.
You might think that the ends of the Amazonian trip might have put him off
exploring, but Wallace was soon ready to go back out again. And in 1854,
he set off for the Malay archipelago, better known back then as the east Indies.
But before we get into that journey,
let me tell you something about today's sponsor, curiosity stream,
curiosity stream is a subscription streaming service that offers over 2000
documentaries and non-fiction titles from some of the world's best filmmakers,
including exclusive originals.
If you're enjoying this video and the subject matter, of course,
then I particularly recommends that you check out their series out of the
cradle, which as you might guess from the title is all about humanities earlier
ancestors and how they evolved into us.
It's a great documentary that takes you on an amazing two hour journey.
It's perfect watch after this video or when you've just got a bit more time on
your hands to sit back and enjoy a full length documentary.
Curiosity stream is available on loads of platforms, wherever you've got,
whether you know, all the way from an Xbox to your mobile phone to laptop,
it's all gonna work. And it's also available worldwide.
You can get unlimited access starting at just $2 99 a month.
And the first 30 days are completely free. If you sign up at curiosity,
stream.com/biographics and use the code,
biographics all one word lowercase, no quotes during the sign up process.
It's a great way to support this show.
Lots of you reach out to me and tell you how much you are enjoying curiosity
stream. So great fit for this channel. And, uh, let's get back to it. Shall we,
This trip proved to be far more fruitful for Wallace who spent the next eight
years of his life there.
He collected well over 120,000 spare and sent them back to England times,
employing up to 100 assistants to travel.
The acapella go far and wide in search of curious species of animals among them
was a young boy named ally who went into Wallace's employer while the naturalist
was in Singapore. He started off doing the cooking and cleaning,
but learned from his employer and began accompanying him on journeys.
And eventually went out alone, looking for specimens to study.
He ended up being Wallace's most faithful,
servant and collected and prepared over 5,000 animals.
Many of which still stood in natural history. Museums around the world.
Wallace described him as the faithful companion of almost all his journeying
among the islands of the far east,
the boy married while working for the naturalist and took the name Ali Wallace
unsurprisingly.
During his time in the east Indies Wallace discovered and described many new
animal species.
He also observed that there seemed to be a significant change in the wildlife.
When you traveled between the islands of Bali and Loach,
the short stretch of water that separates those two land masses is now known as
the Wallace line and is regarded as the natural park audition between the Asian
and Australian wildlife Wallace chronicled his entire expedition and all his
observances in a book titled the Malay archipelago.
He published it in 1869 and it became a big hit and seen as one of the most
significant science books of the 19th century.
Of course,
Wallace's biggest achievement was his work on the theory of evolution by 1855,
he already became convinced that living things could evolve over long periods of
time, but he didn't understand the mechanism behind this natural process.
Yet the answer came to him in 1858.
Our he fell ill with fever and suffered hallucinations. Once the, it broke.
Wallace had a bit of a Eureka moment and realized that species evolve in order
to adapt to their environment. This revelation prompted him to act immediately.
He wrote down his theory in a short paper and sent it to a colleague of his and
another expert in the field to review it before publication.
That person was Charles Darwin. Now, to be clear,
we're not suggesting that Darwin stole any of Wallace's work or even that the
two were competing against one another. In fact,
one of the main reasons why Wallace sent his ideas to Darwin was because he knew
that the other naturalist was studying something similar.
Darwin also had some previous work in the form of a letter,
an unpublished essay,
which attested to the fact that he developed his ideas independently,
even so Darwin realized that some controversy may arise.
So he asked his colleagues, uh, Charles Lyle.
And so Joseph Dalton for advice in the end,
they decided that Darwin and Wallace should write a joint article,
comprising both their scientific papers, therefore on lie. The first 1858,
the line society of London heard a presentation on as a tendency of species to
form varieties and on the perpetuation of varieties and species by natural
means of selection. Wallace was still in the east Indies.
So he wasn't there to share his findings in person,
but this represented the first announcement of the Darwin Wallace theory of
evolution by natural selection.
The paper appeared in print one month later because the paper stirred enough
interest,
Charles Darwin decided to take the big books that he was working on and condense
it into an abstract that was easier to take in by the average reader.
He published it the next year with the title on the origin of species.
Needless to say that book was quite successful and indeed became the defining
work on the theory of evolution.
That is how Charles Darwin's name became inexorably linked with this notion
while Alfred Wallace was slowly pushed to the site,
it probably didn't help that Wallace seemed to know,
hurry to capitalize on his newfound successes.
It was still interested in still the bio of the Maar Pao.
After this paper was published.
He still spent another four years in the east Indies before finally returning to
London back in England,
Wallace began giving presentations on the theory of evolution.
He met Anne's prevented Darwin as well as many other scientists who were eager
to ask questions and praise.
The naturalist for his work Wallace was given more or less every science award
under the sun.
So it's not like the scientific community was trying to deny or diminish his
accomplishments.
It was just unfortunate timing that doomed him to semi obscurity.
When he returned from his trip,
he dedicated his efforts towards writing the Malay archipelago.
By the time he published contributions to the theory of natural selection,
a series of as 18, 18 70, the public already associated Darwin with evolution.
And it was too late to change their minds,
Explorations and evolution aside.
Wallace had been involved in a few other interesting episodes that merit
discussion. One of them known as the Bedford level experiment.
He came to regard as the most regrettable incident in his life when he tried to
prove to a flat earth that the planet was round, but Wallace,
his thought would be an afternoon of work and easy money turned into 15 years of
continued worry litigation and persecution.
It all started in 80 38 with a convinced flat Arthur named Samuel robo,
who made a series of observations along the old Bedford river in the fenlands of
C, which he claimed proved that the earth was flat.
He watched a Boze with a flag tied to its mask three feet above water level,
sail in a straight line in for six miles. According to his calculations,
the flag should have dipped below his line of sight,
eight inches for every mile. It traveled. If the earth was curved,
it stayed at the same level. However,
showing that the planet was flat in reality, any engineer, severe or physicist,
would've been able to spot robot's mistake.
He placed his telescope only eight inches above the water level and did not
account for atmospheric refraction, which causes light to deviate us.
It passes through our atmosphere because the ad density changes at different
Heights, even.
So Rob was happy with his findings and published them under the pseudonym para,
then nothing happens for a few decades until 1870.
When Rob's experiments found an enthusiastic supporter in a religious,
an addict named John Hampton,
Hampton had been converted by another flat earth named William Carpenter and
quickly became obsessed with defending Genesis to the hilt.
He was convinced that any notion that went against the literal word of the Bible
was nonsense that needed to be eradicated from society.
He also had a lot of resources and free time on his hands. Thanks to you.
A generous inheritance from his father.
Eventually ham wanted to put his money where his mouth was and placed a wager in
the journal scientific opinion.
He was willing to bet anywhere between 50 to 500 pounds that no man of science
would be able to prove to him and a referee that a canal river lake or
railway was convex. Alfred Wallace saw the notice.
And since he had never been a rich man considered it easy money,
he even consulted a friend and esteemed colleague, Charles Lyle,
who encouraged him to stop these foolish people.
Wallace in Hampton began conversing.
And at first it seems like the matter would be straightforward.
Wallace proposed. They used by lake for their means,
but Hampton in insisted on Bedford river,
the same stretch of water that unbeknownst to the naturalist had been used by
robo 30 years prior.
They also agreed that the referee should be an editor of a science journal,
a Lance civil engineer, or member of the Royal geographical society.
They settled on John Henry Wall shed,
a fields magazine who knew neither man had had no stakes in the debate.
Then things started to go wrong. For starters,
even though both men agreed on Walsh's referee Hamden insisted,
there would be a second referee of his choosing. He selected William Carpenter,
the same flat author who converted him.
Not only did he not have any of the qualifications agreed upon,
he was about as far removed from impartial, as you could possib.
Imagine Wallace made two crucial modifications to the original Bedford level
experiment.
He placed his Sightline 13 feet above water to minimize the effects of
refraction and put a long pole at the halfway mark to make it easier to see the
curvature between the two end points.
Unsurprisingly experiment correctly showed that the earth was rounds,
but his opponents were not satisfied.
They kept demanding changes and Wallace acquiesced to all of their requests,
knowing full well that none of them would magically flatten the planet.
Half days work soon turned into a week, but in the end,
a Walsh decided in favor of Wallace and the article Hamden through a fit.
He demanded his money back saying that he had been cheated.
And when the scientist refused, he took him to court.
What followed was 15 years of protracted legal battles into harassment
campaigns that went so extreme that they eventually landed Hampton in jail.
Even though at one point he had gotten his money back.
Hamden would not stopped tormenting Alfred Wallace,
none of his friends and family members were safe either as the flat earth sent
them all vitriol letters to crying that they would have a relationship with a
lying feral thief and a convicted felon, such as Wallace. At one point,
he even sent a death threat to the naturalist's wife saying that he will ensure
that Wallace never dies in his and instead will one day be carried home
with every bone in his head smashed to pulp.
This went too far and TA was imprisoned, but in the end,
the whole ordeal cost wallers a lot of time effort and hundreds of pounds in
legal fees.
Perhaps one of the reasons why Wallace was not as well known as Darwin was his
reluctance to dedicate himself to a single topic.
He was sometimes called the grand old man of science because he studied and
wrote about many different subjects.
He was an early environmentalist and even 150 years ago,
he warned that human activities such as large scale deforestation and erosion
will have a negative impact on the climate.
Wallace became an even more th fervent environmental advocate as the decades
rolled on in the world of life published a few years before his death,
Wallace accused all the greatest nations claiming the first place for
civilization and religion of causing widespread Rav of the Earth's surface on
a scale never seen, but four awesome. In his later years,
Wallace turned his attention towards the sky and wanted if there was any life
out there. He wrote a book in 1904 titled man's place in the universe,
which represented one of the first scientific attempts to examine planetary
habitability.
He concluded earth was the only planet suitable for life in the solar system,
because it was the only one that could stain liquid water. A few years later,
Wallace wrote a second book on the subject, focusing on Mars.
That was at a time when a man named Peral Lao stirred the public into a frenzy
by claiming there were canals on Mars built by an intelligence species Wallace's
book, debunked, the claim. And obviously he was later proven,
correct when higher quality telescopes revealed the canal to just be optical
illusions Wallace also held some controversial beliefs that often strained his
relationships with fellow scientists.
He was a devoted believer in spiritualism and had investigated it for decades.
Mesmerism sounds his spirit photography.
He believed in all of them to various degrees,
even some of his closest colleagues,
such as Henry Bates and Charles Darwin thought the Wallace was being stubbornly
credulous.
And it did have an effect on his reputation within the scientific community.
At one point, it almost cost Wallace,
a civil pension that he desperately needed.
And it was mainly thanks to Darwin's interference that he received it in the
perhaps even more controversial and certainly more pertinent to our times.
Alfred Wallace was also part of the anti-vaccination movement in Victor,
in England,
particularly he was against mandatory vaccination for small parks because he
felt it would disturb the balance of nature. Again,
this landed him in hot water with many of his scientific colleagues,
despite his Folies Wallace remained active all his life writing almost two dozen
books and over 500 scientific papers. He died on November the seventh,
1913 at the age of 90 in his home in Broadstone in the English countryside.
There were calls to bury him Westminster Rady,
but Wallace was buried and the local Broadstone cemetery,
according to his wishes while medallion was placed at Westminster next to
Charles Darwin. So I really hope you found that video. Interesting.
If you want more stuff like this,
do check out our fantastic sponsor curiosity stream.
I'm gonna link to them below and as always, thank you for watching.